Okay, welcome back everyone. This is
lecture B9 of Cisco rethinking 2026. Uh,
today I want to take you beyond the
generalized linear model as wonderful as
it is. Uh, before I get into that again,
I'm going to remind you deviation from
the original plan schedule just for this
section. Um, your last lecture will be
on the 20th of March, not the 13th of
March. Uh, because I'm I'm going to be
coming back from Cambridge on that day.
I apologize. This was this was poor
scheduling on my part. Um, but you miss
a lecture on Friday the 13th. Yeah, if
you're at all superstitious.
No. Um, okay. So, what is this about?
Well, um, I know some of you have seen
this video before. This is a delightful
video. Uh, this video is a metaphor for
modeling with linear and generalized
linear models. The the thing about doing
scientific modeling with linear
regression, multiple linear regression,
and generalized linear regression,
generalized linear mix models and and so
forth, is you can model lots of stuff
with them. They're extremely flexible.
Absolutely. They're the square hole. You
can stick all of the shapes through it,
right? Just absolutely every time. But
it's disappointing if you're a scientist
and you're attending to the scientific
details of your work because that when
you look at the structure of the
statistical model
uh even if it's generative even if you
can simulate predictions from it it
doesn't reflect the structure of the
scientific topic you're studying right
it's this weird gap and that friction
there so that in the lecture today I
want to go beyond this um and stop
sticking all the shapes through the
square hole okay I'm just going to give
you two examples uh there's a chapter in
the book called Generalized Linear
Madness. Same as this lecture, which has
um two additional examples, I think, if
I remember it right, each of a different
flavor. Uh but I've only got time for
two today. Oh, yeah. So, wait, her
expressions are just so good.
It's like, no, you monster. [laughter]
Don't do it.
Isn't that great? Okay. Um so, that's
how I feel when I read journal articles,
right? No, I generalized linear models
are great. Okay. GLMs, you can do a lot
with them. They're very flexible and we
can scale them up to really big data
sets with lots of variable structure,
right? Then they're like this. This is a
generalized linear mix model. It's still
a cat. Still all the same basic
machinery, right? It's just bigger. So,
the wonderful thing about cats, I'm
definitely a cat person, uh, is that no
matter the size of the cat, they all
behave the same. Tigers are just giant
house cats. They have all the same play
behaviors and grooming behaviors and
everything. is a wonderful thing. Um,
and and you can also stick GLMs together
in interesting and functional ways.
Things like the fixed effect strategy,
right, where we put a bunch of them
together.
This is totally legitimate. There's
nothing wrong with it. I searched
through a lot of cat photos to make this
meme for you. I hope you all appreciate.
Um, but this is not an argument against
GLM and GLM GLMM and fixed effects
models and the like. In some sense, an
argument for them. They're broadly super
useful.
That's a really great thing about them.
But we can do better.
They're flexible machines for measuring
partial associations. Uh combined with
structural causal models and generative
models and the rules of desparation. We
can make powerful causal inferences with
them. Uh they're wonderful tools,
essential parts of what we do in the
sciences. uh but there are scientific
phenomena which don't fit neatly into
these uh single equation model
structures um and we want to have some
way to express them and when we get more
scientific modeling into uh the scaffold
that builds statistics sometimes we can
discover new things that we don't
discover otherwise right by by starting
with something other than the
measurement problem but starting with
the causal mechanisms themselves and I
want to show you some examples so let's
go back to the height data. There going
to be two examples in this. Um if I do
the timing right, they'll each will be
about half of the lecture. The first one
is the old height weight data that I
started with uh in the other section
actually. So the start of the book we
start by modeling. This is the first
linear regression example. In this
section we didn't start here but this is
this data set that Nancy how collected
from Kalahari foragers in the 1960s
mostly in the 1960s. And this is just uh
human height weight data and there's
some other anthrop anthropometric
measurements as well. Um and I use this
in the very beginning of the beginner
section at the very beginning of my book
to introduce the linear model and how we
can justify things like normal error and
and such. Now I want to return to this
and think about uh modeling the
relationship between height and weight
across the human lifespan.
U but outside of a regression framework
really going to the very basics of the
geometry of the human body. So this is a
lometry if you're a biologist that's the
magic word that you would use and I want
to convince you that there's a lot to
this in particular if I can gamify this
a bit. Um I ask you how many parameters
do you think you need to fit this curve?
Yeah I'm going to do it in zero.
Well, I need one just for the residual
error around the curve, but for fitting
the mean, I need zero parameters
because the elometry that relates height
to weight is governed by nothing but the
relationship of length to volume. And I
want to derive that for you and show
that what what how that works. Uh, okay.
All right. This is a human being, right?
[laughter] You all recognize this. This
is an Italian human being, [snorts] but
nevertheless, it's this is a
representative human being, right? And
uh I'm going to approximate this human
being. And it's got some, you know,
there's there's a geometry to the human
body. It's got volume. There are limbs.
Uh uh the point of this illustration
when Da Vinci drew it was to study the
um the geometry of the human body. Uh
I'm going to approximate the geometry of
this body with a cylinder
because I'm a scientist, right? We're
going to start here. Obviously, this is
not good for all purposes, but I want to
show you it gets you quite far. just by
doing this. And what I mean by
approximate with a cylinder is we're
going to focus on two length
measurements, the height and the radius
of the human body. Okay? Uh and there's
an equation you learned in secondary
school and had no reason to use for the
rest of your life probably that relates
volume to that tells you the volume of a
cylinder given its height and radius.
And it is that the volume is pi * r^ 2
times height. Now, this is not a
geometry course, [laughter]
but if you want to recover the intuition
you once had for this, you're just
extruding a circle along a height h. So,
the area of a circle is p<unk> r squ and
then we just multiply by h2 to extrude
it along the height of the u of the uh
of the man. Good. And that's all there
is to it. Okay, let's build up um to the
relationship between height and weight.
Uh let's take the radius now and relate
it to height. So for most human beings
uh there's a the height is a kind of
regular proportion. Um uh the radius of
the cylinder uh the diameter of their
body is a regular proportion of their
height. This varies by individual and it
varies by population. But for a
particular individual we can just uh say
that your your diameter or your radius
is a proportion of your height. Good. So
I've replaced R with another symbol P.
This is progress, right? We have the
same number of parameters we started
with, but it feels like progress. Yeah.
Um and then the next thing we need to do
is relate volume to weight. And we do
that with another parameter I'm going to
invent called K, which I'm going to call
density. It takes a volume and it says
how that translates to weight or mass.
Uh this can also be a property of the
person or the population because your
lean muscle mass will affect your
density and affect how much your volume
relates to uh to weight, right? This is
a thing they do in professional sports
when they float the athletes in those
tanks and measure their their fat body
fat content, right? And turns out to be
like 0.1% or something sickening like
that. But uh uh but this is what K is
going to measure. Are you with me so
far? So now we we can relate a weight
measurement um uh to a height
measurement with all these little
parameters in between.
And this is the final equation. Weight
is k * pi * p ^ 2 where p is a the
proportion of your height that is your
radius times your height cubed.
Cubed is nice. You can I hope you feel
the tingle of being onto something
because that's a volume, right?
Yeah. If it was h squ that would be an
area. H cubed is a volume. Now we are
approximating your weight. This is I
know it feels like but fundamentally
this is just a cube that is your height.
Your body is now a cube adjusted by some
stuff in front of it. Okay.
Um all right. So let's I should have
zoomed in on this so far. So we've got
weight on the left, height on the far
right, density and proportionality. Pi
is not a parameter to be estimated. We
know pi, right? Thanks to the ancient
Greeks, yeah, we know pi. Um, but we
need to estimate K and P. So, we we're
going to need to make a statistical
model now. Um, where weight is our
outcome variable and height is our
predictor. And this is our regression
equation.
This feel good? Yeah. There's no magic
has happened here. I've just done the uh
violent thing of approximating the human
body with a cylinder. But I want to show
you this works unreasonably well. not
perfectly but unreasonably well. Okay,
what do we need to do next? We're going
to need an error distribution to relate
weight uh to the expectation because
this equation that we've written is just
the expected weight for each height and
there's going to be an error
distribution around it. So that's one of
the things we need to uh decide. I'm
going to postpone that choice for a
moment and work on the priors first, but
then we're going to come back to the
error distribution. Okay. Um, we're
going to need a uh prior distributions
for the proportionality
uh uh parameter and a prior for the
density. Um,
choosing priors in generalized linear
models is often uncomfortable, right?
Because what did those things mean?
You've got alpha, you've got beta
coefficients on standardized
measurements. It's really strange. It's
much easier in a scientifically inspired
model. These things mean something. And
so the scientific background gives you
reasonable ranges to start with and we
can start with that and then do again
you know uh everybody in here is an
expert in prior predictive simulation.
So we can do prior predictive
simulations as well and see what we get.
So here's my my recipe for setting
priors. We're going to choose some
measurement scales.
Then we're going to simulate uh and then
we're going to think okay in that order.
You might think thinking uh should be
number one, but I have a particular
thing that I mean by think, and you'll
see when I get to it. Um, okay. What do
I mean by choose measurement scales? Uh,
I haven't emphasized it, but it's always
true that your measurements and
regression equations have units on them.
Yeah. Unless you've divided them out,
which I keep encouraging you to do
because units offend God. Yeah. So to
speak. Maybe not offend him, but they're
they're our invention and they get in
the way sometimes. uh but in this case
height is measured in centimeters in the
data that I've been giving you um and
weight is measured in kilograms and that
tells us the units that exist on these
parameters uh pi and p are unitless
right they're ratios
you believe me there so far proportions
have no units yeah just like
probabilities they have no units uh but
k is a density and a density will have
units like kilogram divided by a volume.
Yeah. So kilogram over cubic
centimeters. That that has to be the
units of K. And that has to be true
because otherwise you couldn't multiply
uh K by H cubed and get kilograms on the
left, right? Do you remember back to
your secondary school education where
you had to carry the units through?
Yeah. Wasn't that horrible? Yeah. My son
is going through this now because he's
taking physics in in secondary school
and it's it's great fun. Um it's a it's
a way to check your math, right? You got
to get the units to balance. So it's
actually a really nice thing. You can do
this with regression equations. All the
same things hold there. Uh so in order
for the left to be for weight to be on
units kilograms, K has to have units
kilograms per cubic centimeter. Um
uh why is this useful for us? Well, um I
want to get rid of these measurement
scales actually. And that's the first
thing I'm going to do. uh they're like I
said they're an artifice of of the human
species the measurement scale even as
useful as they are um so I'd like to
divide them out and how can we do that
we can divide the measurements weight
and height by reference values and that
divides out the units so if I divide
height by the average height either in
the sample or in some general population
doesn't matter it's just some reference
value that you
um that'll make that reference value one
and all other heights will be a
proportion of that and the units will be
gone. The centimeters will be gone.
It'll just it'll have the meaning the
measurement will have the meaning
proportion of the reference value. But
no no information has been destroyed. We
can that's that's a non-destructive
transformation. We can always reverse
it. Yeah, there are destructive
transformations but this is not one of
them. Does that make sense? Okay. And we
can do the same for weight. So in this
case to make it simple I'm going to
divide all the heights by the mean
height and all the weights by the mean
weight. Um and that gets rid of all the
units. Uh so these curves look the same.
This is just to show you that there's
been no destruction or actual
transformation. We've just changed the
numbers on the axis and gotten rid of
the units. Nevertheless, work has been
done here because now we're going to be
it's going to be easier to think about
um the parameters P and K free from
these arbitrary things like kilograms.
And what is a kilogram? Something some
Swiss person made up sometime some
hundreds of years ago, right? Um I'm not
sure it was a Swiss person, but I'm
going to bet it was a Swiss person.
Yeah.
>> I don't know. I When in doubt, guess a
Bernoli. That's like that's like my
rule. Who did it? some Bernoli brother,
right? There are like nine of them. They
did a bunch of things. I'm not sure
though. [snorts] Okay, you with me so
far? Yeah. Does this make sense? Okay,
now we've still got our priors. Um, but
now we can think about them as a
proportion. So, uh, P is a proportion.
So, it must be between zero and one. And
it must be then less less than a half
because the the radius of your body as a
cylinder is less than half your height.
Unless you're Gimly, [snorts] right? If
people still know who Gimley was. Sorry,
I should check with these things. It's
now that's now a classic movie. Um, but
right, for most of us, uh, uh, it's
going to turn out, and this is just a
foreshadow, for small children, that is
not the case, right? Small children are
never wider than they are tall. That's
not true. But the they're closer to
being as wide as they are tall. And
you're going to see that that's going to
manifest in the fit. Uh, which is a
general feature I'll return to again.
When you have a scientifically inspired
model like this that you build up to,
the ways that the model misfits the data
are informative scientifically in a way
that it's not in a generalized linear
model because generalized linear models
are epicycles. Remember, you can fit
anything with them. But the misfit is
not a not an indication of physics.
Yeah.
Just like you know the tomic model of
the solar system when the orbits are
misfit it doesn't tell you you need more
epicycles right it's there's not I mean
more epicycles would help uh but that's
not going to help you figure out the
scientific basis here the misfit is way
more informative okay so we can put a
prior distribution on p by thinking
about what it is um k now uh it's a
density so it needs to be positive and
it needs to be greater than one
um because after we we've rescaled I had
it on the previous graph. After we've
rescaled the heights and weights, um,
uh, the weight is is larger than the
height after we've done the means. Yeah.
For individuals, you'll see it again
when the data comes back up. So, let's
put in some some crude priors here. Um,
which don't satisfy all these
constraints. I'm just giving you an
example of some weakly informative
priors. But in these cases, you can
argue for these scientifically based
upon the meaning of them, which is not
generally easy to do for generaliz for
for slopes and intercepts. Um, so for P,
I propose beta 2550, which I know sounds
ridiculous and weird, but that's because
it creates the distribution on the
screen there, uh, the the one on top,
um, where it's all the probability
masses below a half, um, but not much
below a half,
but it's weekly informative. Anything
there's a lot of positive probability
between 0 2 and 0.5. uh we'll start
there and see what the curves look like.
Um
uh and then K is exponential 0.5.
Remember uh or learn if it's the first
time you thought of this, the the
relationship between the rate of an
exponential and the mean of an
exponential is that each is the inverse
of the other. So the mean of of an
exponential with a rate of 0.5 is two
because that's one over.5.
I know this is somebody made a decision
a really long time ago to parameterize
it. this way and that's just how it is.
But the the the mean of an exponential
is the inverse of its rate.
Okay. Yeah. So I'm making it two because
that's greater than one and the density
needs to be greater than one. I'm I've
chosen a distribution though which will
allow values less than one. This is um a
a form of prior choice that I am a fan
of. This is what's called weekly
informative. There's a constraint, but
I'm not making it hard. And I'm not
making it hard because that gives me an
opportunity to discover model
misspecification. If I fit this to the
data and K ends up being less than one,
that makes me back up and check
everything. If I force it to be greater
than one, I don't have the opportunity
opportunity to detect my mistake. Does
that make sense? This is called weekly
informative priors. in the Gelman Vetery
uh uh and me basian workflow book
that'll come out later than this year.
We argue very strongly for this in
context of some case studies and such.
It's just you want you want to work in a
way that gives you the opportunity to
discover previous modeling mistakes and
I think hard boundaries on parameters
will stop you from doing that sometimes.
So this is weakly informative. We're
leaving information out like this needs
to be greater than one but it's
strategic to to help us debug our
workflow. Okay. If it if the posterior
distribution ends up being greater than
one, which it will in this case, yay.
But something else is going to go wrong
here. Spoiler alert. Um, and then then
we'll work forward from there. I should
pause for a moment and ask if there are
questions. Does this make sense? I
haven't done prior predictive simulation
yet, but I'm going to. But to do the
prior predictive simulation, I need to
pick a distribution, an error
distribution as well. So that's the next
thing we're going to do. Right? remember
because the prior predictive simulation
uses the whole generative model and I
haven't picked the likelihood yet. I
haven't picked the error model. So
that's next. Um what do we know about
weight? Um it's always a positive real,
right? You can't have negative weight.
Yeah, agreed. There's the skeptical
faces. Just think it through for a
moment. Take as much time as you need.
It's like a philosophical question. Um
uh and the other thing about
measurements like weight is the variance
scales with the mean. There's not a
constant error around the prediction
equation for all weights. You buy that?
Yeah. And this is this is common of of
almost any growth process in nature.
It's not that the scaling will be the
same across all but there's a there's a
coefficient of variation if anything is
maintained across it. That the ratio
between the variance and the mean might
be maintained. Um might be uh but that's
at the best thing that might be
maintained. So there's a very natural
distribution that arises from lots of
growth processes and that's the log
normal
which we haven't worked with a lot in
this in this section yet. Have we did we
have another example with logn normal? I
don't think so. Log normal is super
useful for growth processes. It's super
natural. It's really easy to work with
too because it's just a log of a normal.
That's it. There's nothing else to
learn. And indeed it's parameterized
like a normal distribution. the the
parameters mu and sigma in it are the
parameters of the normal that you get
when you log the measurement. This is
you have to keep this in mind because
the mean the mean of the outcome is not
mu. The mean of the outcome is a
function of mu and I'll show you what
that function is in a moment and it's
not simple because the variance scales
with the mean but I just want to get
this stuff I've got a little bit of
text. Yeah, mu and logn normal is the
mean of log not mean of observed. Does
that make some sense? Yeah. So you if
you took all the weight measurements and
you logged them, we're saying they'll
have a normal distribution. But the raw
weight measurements don't have a normal
distribution. They have a logn normal
distribution.
This is not helpful. This is I know this
is like inadequate language for this.
and the mean. If we parameterize a logn
normal with mu and sigma, which are the
parameters of the normal that you get
when you log the measurements, that
means that the equation for the mean of
the raw measurements is a function of
both parameters. And I'm going to show
it to you in a moment. Okay? It's it's
just true. Which means the mean the mean
scales with both of them, which is what
we want, right? So this is all good. I
know it seems annoying, but it's because
it obeys the physics of growth
processes. And this is how it works. You
with me? Yeah. Um, okay.
Yes. All right. Here we go. Now, we're
ready to do the prior predictive
simulation. Uh, how does this work? Let
me walk you through the code a little
bit. Um, I'm going to we're going to
draw do 30 draws from the prior. I do 30
draws from the beta with uh 25 successes
and 50 failures. That's what that's what
how the beta distribution is
parameterized.
um and then 30 draws from the
exponential for K. Then we've got this
sigma parameter which is the error on
the log scale and I'm going to give that
uh this conventional exponential one
that I've been using a lot.
Um now I go through each um each of the
uh well I set up a sequence across the
horizontal axis. That's what x sequence
is. All the heights I want to simulate
um the expected weight across. I set up
a an empty plot. That's what plot null
does. Yeah, I'm rolling with BA R here.
I know for some of you this is painful.
Like, why is old man Mreath doing BAS R?
I'm sorry. This is just how it's going
to be. All right, I'm not against
ggplot. This is just, you know, this is
the way you do this stuff in BAS R. I
learned R 1999. Okay, that's just that's
why it's like this. Yeah. So, we're
going to party like it's 1999. And then
I then I loop um through each of the uh
prior draws and I compute the mean. Um
so the first thing I do is I say mu is
the log of um that's the mean equation
right it's pi * k i because each i is
one of the prior draws times p i^2 and
then x sequence cubed and xsequence are
the height values right so for each of
them um and then I draw the line that
goes with that x sequence on the
horizontal now here comes the equation
for the mean of a log normal it is e to
the mu + sigma^ 2 / 2 just rolls off the
tongue doesn't it? So the mean of a log
normal scales both with sigma and mu as
a consequence of that equation. Yeah and
that's that's a thing you can just
derive from the relationship. Um and
again this this is a property that we
want for growth processes is it makes
the mean scale with the variance. Yeah,
it's a good thing. Um anyway, and then
we get the graph on the right. Um and
the the horizontal and vertical dash
lines there show you the reference
values of one and one. Um so the point
is at the population mean combination of
those. This is a very loose set of
priors across a bunch of growth
processes. Yeah. Um and in particular,
we know that the the curve we want needs
to pass through that point, right?
Because a regression line needs to pass
through the person with the average
weight and the average height or at
least you should come pretty close to
it. Otherwise, it's a bad regression
line. Does that make sense? I'll say it
again. A good reg regression line for
most problems is going to come pass
right through or come really close to
passing through a person who has the
average weight and the average height.
Yeah. Doesn't have to exactly pass
through it for a curve linear
relationship, but it should get pretty
close or it's going to do a bad job
elsewhere. Does that make sense? So,
this is this is a super loose set of
priors, but we have a lot of data. So, I
suggest we go forward. Again, the point
of prior simulation is not to pre fit
your your curve. Although in this case,
as I'll show you in a moment, we
basically can because I told you we're
going to go to zero parameters pretty
soon. Yes. Or one parameter. Sigma will
survive. That's the only one that will
survive. Okay. Are you with me so far?
Is this I know I'm going slow, but I
think these workflow steps are are
useful. Um, now we fit the model. Uh,
you don't have to use ulam for this. You
could use quap. Uh, you could use uh you
could just use maximum likelihood. uh
this is this is not a difficult fitting
problem in any means. Um
make the data list uh uh in this ula
model I don't think there are any
surprises dl norm is just the r name for
logn normal. Yeah. Um, and you'll notice
the uh exponential link function on the
second line I I write x mu. And that's
because mu is the mean of the of the
normal you get when you log. And so the
exponent of mu is the mean of the of the
raw measurements. And so that's the
relevant link function here. You're used
to log links. Now we have an exponent
link, right? But it's logical because
that's what we need for the log normal
because because we derived an equation
that related weight to height on the
measure on the raw scale. But the log
normal wants a predictor on the log
scale. So the exponent undoes that. Did
that help? Does it make sense? Yeah.
When you review these later, it'll make
sense. I hope. Yeah. And I think that's
the only surprise. Yes. Is there
anything else here I should talk about?
Is that good? Okay. Good. I appreciate
your nodding. It's the good audience
participation. Um,
and all right, let's do a quick
posterior predictive check and see how
good this fits. That ain't bad. Yeah,
that's pretty good. And all we did was
assume a person is a cylinder. You'll
notice the children are not predicted
very well. Uh, uh, I've already hinted
why I think that is. Um and it's because
their uh the rel their radius as a
proportion of their height is is
systematically different.
Yeah. And so if we wanted to improve
this model, we would adjust P by age
for example. Yeah. That would be a way
forward. That's one of the advantages of
scientifically inspired models like this
is that the way it misfits the data
gives you ideas about how to expand the
model to do better. gives you
constructive ideas. Whereas with GLMs,
you can just add more epicycles and have
an arbitrarily good fit anytime you
want, but that isn't going to
necessarily help you
make a better scientific model. Good.
All right, let me let me quickly finish
this example now. Uh we're about halfway
through. Um now step three is thinking.
You might think we've been thinking so
far. Yes, we have. But now we're really
going to think, okay, it's like thinking
squared. And so let's come back to our
equation for the mean.
Um, and I want to show you something in
the posterior samples now. So if we we
take the posterior samples from the
model we just fit and we plot K against
P ^2. This is the posterior
distribution.
Have you seen anything like this before?
This this is a curve that relates the
two together.
A curve. Uh these two things share a lot
of joint information.
If you know one, you know the other. Do
you see that there's a curve? These
posterior samples are on a curve. This
is not a distribution. Well, it is a
distribution. Everything is, but this is
a curve. Um we can derive this curve
from the equation on the left of the
slide. Now, we're going to do that.
Um okay because I have uh divided the
height and weight by a reference value
um at the values one uh I know that uh
there's a person there we want the curve
to go through it so we know that one is
equal to we know that this is true that
one is equal to k pi p ^2 1 yeah
approximately this is the assertion that
for the regression the trend should go
through the average person in both
height
And I know the average values because
you
can solve that equation for K. And it
tells me that K is 1 pi P^2.
And now I'm going to plot that equation
on the posterior distribution on the
right.
Do you like that? [laughter]
Yeah, I like that a lot. This is this is
my happy place, right? So we can get rid
of parameters here. What are K and P
square doing? They're just handling
measurement scales and that's why
they're bound together and they they
have so much joint information. Um
they're not they're really nothing that
needs to be fit at all. So now I can
take uh uh k there I can replace k with
1 over pi p ^2 in the original equation
and the original equation becomes 1= 1
cubed which I hope you will agree is
true.
Isn't it nice when algebra works out
that way? Okay. Um, so it turns out we
don't need any of those parameters. And
so I'm going to get rid of them. Here's
our new uh regression equation. Uh, they
I just say that e to the mu is h cubed.
That's our whole regression. The only
parameter that remains is sigma. And I'm
going to fit it again. How well do you
think it'll resemble the previous one?
It's the same. [laughter]
Isn't that great? So this is the magic
of a lometry. So much of the
relationship between a length
measurement of an organism and its
volume and things related to its volume
like its mass are governed fundamentally
just by the dimensionality of those
measurements. The fact that some of them
are cubes of the others and all the
other parameters are just to handle
measurement scales which are artifice
that people use because they have to
invent rulers. Yeah. Um, like in the UK,
I think people still talk about their
weight in stones. Is that [laughter]
true? Yeah. Which I adore. Don't get me
wrong. I think that's amazing. Um, but
just shows how arbitrary that stuff is,
right? Um, anyway, so uh, this general
principle I learned in high school a
very long time ago from a physics
teacher where you do dimensional
analysis or dimensionless analysis. you
try to divide out the the scales of
measurement because that reduces down to
fundamental ratios between theoretical
parameters and those are the things you
want to understand and you get rid of
all the measurement scale artifice and
simplify the problem and that's what
we've done here in the elometry example.
Okay, so let me try to summarize and
then we'll do the second example. Um
most of the relationship between height
to weight is just a relationship between
length and volume which in hindsight is
maybe obvious but when you start it's
not. Yeah. Um again, uh changes in body
shape are likely to explain the poor fit
for children. That's a a way to expand
the model. Think about relationships to
age. Um and this is one of the big
advantages of trying to build up a
statistical model from the basic biology
or physics of the problem first, not
going immediately to linear modeling or
generalized linear modeling, which again
I'm not against because it's productive.
Uh but this this approach is ultimately
much better.
Okay. Good.
Yeah. No questions. Good. All right.
Let's do the second one. Second one's
completely different. Um, for the second
half of this lecture, I want to talk
about population dynamics. Uh, there's
been lots of requests to talk about time
series. Uh, Peter, who's not here today,
sorry, I just shamed him on a recording.
I'm not trying to shame you, Peter. I'm
sure you have a good excuse for not
being here. Uh, yeah, I would, again,
half of Lipick is sick today. uh he sent
me a a very thoughtful email asking me
about different ways to model time
series and I responded to that and I
said well I'm going to do something for
you on Friday so here's the recording
for you um uh time series data is really
important too and those of you who know
my professional work I'm very in much
into population dynamics and uh that's
one of the things I work on so um one of
the things about modeling population
dynamics is that the measurements aren't
um well I'm going to walk our ways into
this generally. So the measurements you
can take of the population are done with
error. What we want to model are the
true states of the population and treat
the measurements as emissions from those
true states. So we don't it doesn't make
sense even though it can be productive,
it doesn't make sense scientifically to
treat your previous measurement as a
cause of your next measurement, which is
the kind of default thing to do in a
time series analysis. Yeah. Do you
understand what I'm talking about? Yeah.
there. You're wincing because
>> you're ruining my latest
>> Oh, sorry. I mean, no, I'm I'm helping
you solve your your problems. Uh, but
this is a fundamental problem. So,
um, like I collaborate a lot with
ecologists and this is a standard
problem in ecological time series. Uh,
there's the true state of the
population, but we've only got proxies
of the animal densities and their
locations and we're trying to model uh
the true dynamics of the population, but
all we've got are these noisy
measurements of it. and we want to build
models of that and that's what
ecological statistitians do. Um so in
this case I'm going to go back to kind
of a a core thing in um population
dynamics and think and model the
ecological dynamics between two species.
This is a very classic ecology model. No
one would fit this model to data these
days. We have much better population
dynamic models, but it's a it's a nice
toy model and it actually captures a lot
of really interesting things about
population dynamics. Uh so the the the
um uh est demand is going to be how
different species interact and how do
interactions influence population
dynamics. Uh trying to it's like a a
community ecology uh relationship and
it's a predator prey example. Uh the the
predator here was a lynx. Uh these are
Canadian lynx uh and hairs, Canadian
hairs. Um and yes, there are more
mammals in this pop in this community,
but this is a real historical data set.
Um uh the data are thousands of pelts
that were delivered to trading stations
um probably near near present day
Toronto because that's all there is in
Canada. Sorry Canadians, but [laughter]
just inviting hate mail from Canadians.
But um between 1900 and 1920. So number
of pelts is a proxy because it depends
upon hunting intensity and lots of other
things, right? It's it's measured with
error. Absolutely. But there are these
very intriguing cycles which have
inspired generations of ecologists and
led to lots of productive work in
population ecology for modeling other
data sets um including exper
experimental data sets. You can do
experimental versions of this in
laboratories with insects and there's
been a number of studies like that which
are really slick. There's a homework
problem in my book where I give you an
insect data set and ask you to apply
this model to it. Yeah. So, um, uh, but
you'll see that what you see in lots of
predator prey systems is the the prey
density goes up. The black curve is the
hair and then the, uh, there's a lagged
response. It seems to be our eyes really
want to see some causal relationship
here because, uh, links eat hair. Where
do links come from? They come from other
links. Yeah. There was a time when
biologists didn't know that, right? But
now we all agree that if you want a
lynx, you need a lynx. Yeah. And if you
want a hair, you need a hair. That's
that's a great I'm getting funny looks,
but there there were classic experiments
to see where maggots came from, right?
They sealed a steak in a vacuum sealed
tube, right? This is a classic I forget
the French biologist who did this, but
there was this idea of abiogenesis that
maggots would spontaneously emerge from
rotting meat. I mean, we you laugh, but
>> No, no, I know it from eels. Yes.
>> Really confused about how eels came to
be, but I just didn't think it applied
to links.
>> Yeah, exactly. Exactly. Well, eels are
strange. There was a comment about eels.
Eels have a very strange life history.
It's fascinating. They're heroes of the
life life history Olympics in some ways.
But um anyway, so there were these
classic experiments and again I forget
forget which French biologist it was. I
think it was a French biologist who
literally blew glass around a steak,
right? And then watched it rot and then
you get no maggots. But if it's exposed
to the air, maggots appear. So where do
they come from? They come from eggs,
right? That's where they come from.
Okay. But that said, we want to see
causation here. We want to see that the
links are eating the hairs and that
increases their uh their population and
then they exhaust the the the local
hairs and then their populations go back
down and the cycle can continue until
one or the other crashes. Yeah. And this
is a classic predator prey system. And
there are many models of this and I want
us to work with the most basic one. Um
uh little bit of general information
about time series modeling. The standard
GLM approach to time series modeling is
to use lag variables. So this is the
kind of DAG you would draw off if you
were going to talk about a time series.
Yeah, Sarah's nodding. I know you've
done this. And I'm I'm a big fan of
this. There's nothing wrong with this.
Like diagramming your assumptions is
good. Um this is what you call a cross
lag model where the the measurements uh
y and x in the next time period are
influenced by the previous measurements
and some constant effects like z which
are influencing everything. Yeah. And
the lag variables is that we're going to
predict say t using yt minus one and xt
minus one. That's the glm approach. You
can do a lot of useful work this way.
Um, sometimes people will do even deeper
lags which are often necessary to get a
good fit like yus 2 and t and xus 2.
This is non-causal nonsense but it will
let you fit curves. Right? Why is it
non-causal there? I assert that
something that happened two time periods
ago cannot exert a causal effect on what
happens next. Right? The only thing that
affects what happens next is the
present.
You with me? I mean even lag minus one's
a little weird because it's only the
present. But that's just a measurement
issue. We don't have anything closer,
right? So any of the causal effect of
what happened two time periods ago is
only transmitted through what happened
one time period ago, right? And then
what happened now. Does that make sense?
This is the marovian assumption about
how these about physical simulations.
Does that make sense? That that real
causation is memoryless in that sense
that all that matters is the state of
the world now. And the state of the
world now is conditioned on all the
stuff that happened before that matters
for causation. This is a little bit
philosophical, but have I have I
persuaded you? Yeah. So, if you want to
do lag minus 2, fine, but you're giving
up on causal inference at that point.
Yeah. Um, okay. What's wrong with the
lag thing? Uh, well, aside from the
weird deeper lag issues, uh, it makes
very strong assumptions about the
functional relationships among the
variables. Maybe they're not additive,
uh, on some latent scale. Yeah. um
ignores measurement error. You can tack
measurement on here. You can make you
can expand this DAG in monstrous ways to
add the measurement layer. Absolutely.
That's you could do that. Uh but usually
people don't. Um and there's very little
science here, mostly statistics. And the
whole goal of this is to push more
science into it because because there
are real dividends to be had there. So
let's model this uh in the classic
population ecology way. Um what we know
about closed populations again this is
axiomatic is since hairs only come from
hairs and links only come from links the
change in the hair population in with
respect to time that's what dh over dt
means here um is the bursts minus the
deaths
and the same is true of the links
that's true this is not an assumption
well it's an assumption but it's true
it's unarguably true migration would add
extra terms to this. So you can expand
this to an open population, but in a
closed population where without
migration, this is all there is. Okay,
you with me? Um,
and now we can start modeling this. So
we've got we're going to need parameters
for the birth rate and the death rates
and we can relate those parameters to
the other species. And that's the causal
hypothesis that we want. And so this
immediately becomes what in in GLM terms
an interaction model. So we get a
parameter for the birth rate of hairs
which is independent of the links
because hairs don't eat links
usually.
I suppose if they came across a dead one
they would. But uh in the same sense
that deer eat baby birds when they come
across them right they're facultatively
carnivorous but um but you know the
hairs are eating some some um
unconstraining vegetable resource is the
idea here. uh which is a weakness of the
model because it's not necessarily true.
Uh and then their death rate however is
related to the density of links. There's
a predation parameter, mortality
parameter m subh which is
multiplies time the links density and
then their own density right because if
there are no hairs then they can't die
right so L* M is the proportion of them
is the probability any particular one
dies
that make sense yeah if you don't have
any hairs you can't get negative hairs
so that the the physics of this equation
guarantee you don't get negative
population densities for the hairs
which is already we're better off
because a lag model will happily produce
negative population densities. Yeah,
good. Um, same kind of stuff goes on for
lynx, but it's flipped because the lynx
is the predator. We've got um that their
birth rate depends upon the number of
hairs times their own population size
because only links can produce links. If
there are no links, then none will be
born. It doesn't matter how many hairs
there are. Yes. So there's an
interaction term here, but there's no
main effect. And that's one of the
things I want to get across to you. If
you made a generalized lag model, there
would be main effects of of of the um
links population on their birth rate,
which makes no biological sense.
Yeah. Okay. I need we've got 15 minutes.
We'll finish this. All right. Now, we're
going to add the measurement layer. Um
and I apologize, this goes a bit fast.
This is in the uh chapter in the book
and I go a bit slower with it there. Um
we're going to add logn normal error
onto it again uh because what we have
measured are numbers of pelts
and again it say is population related.
So the mean and the variance are
related. So we're going to use the log
normal as a default.
Um and the mean of uh the mean value is
the log of the um uh of the hair
population times some parameter p which
is the trapping intensity.
Yeah is how much they're interested in
trapping this. And I'm going to make
this a constant here. If you really
wanted to put a you know devote your
life to modeling this time series you
would try to figure out the amount of
trapping intensity at different years.
Yeah. because maybe there'll be proxies
for that.
Um and then uh uh wait I should put this
yeah and then the observed links pelts
on this side. Same idea but uh with
little L's for everything. Um now at the
bottom of this we need to generate
predictions for each year after the
initial one. And the way to do this is
to take those equations we wrote the
differential equations is what they're
called. These are ordinary differential
equations. um the dh over dt and the dl
overdt and sum them up uh through the
time we need to get to the later time
point. And when you sum up a
differential equation, you do something
called an integral. Yeah. And some of
you have had integral calculus so and
then forgotten it but you remember doing
this. Yeah. Um uh in this case, Stan is
going to do this integration for us. So
we don't have to do it inside the
Markoff chain. it's going to do the
integration. But the the logical
structure of it is what's important to
understand here is that we can get a
prediction for any year after the first
year of observation by taking that first
observation h sub one. Here we can get a
prediction for h subt by taking h sub
one and adding some adding up all the
incremental changes that happen after it
according to the model.
Yeah. for any particular parameter
values and then we're going to use the
markoff chain to get a distribution of
those parameter values that fit the data
just as usual and this is a statistical
model. Now does it feel like one? No.
But it absolutely is. Are you good with
me? Yeah. I'm trying to read the facial
expressions and they are every range of
human emotion at this moment. Okay. Um
yeah, I I have an odd uh education in
statistics because I started here in
evolution in the evolutionary ecology
theory and learn statistics after the
fact. So for me it's very natural to do
the something like this on top of a
non-statistical model. U but I I
definitely appreciate that for most
people it doesn't work that way. But I I
learned evolutionary ecology population
genetics before I learned statistics.
And so for me it's it's very comforting
to start with the the the ODEs. Um,
let's do prior predictive simulation.
I'm not going to go through talking
about all the priors. I spend a lot more
time in the text on this. I encourage
you to look at it. Uh, it's hard to
visualize the prior predictive
simulation here because these curves are
related to one another in the priors in
powerful ways. It generates stronger um,
uh, echoes uh, and predator prey
dynamics depending upon the uh, the
birth and death rate and the predation
parameters and so on. So, I'm just here
taking some samples for you from it to
show you that. But in the book, I build
them up like what do the priors need to
be like in order to produce uh cycles
and prevent things from crashing and and
and those sorts of things. In these
nonlinear models, prior predictive
simulation is really critical because
you just there's no way to intuit it how
these parameters interact when you
choose the values. Okay.
Um okay, this is not something um you
can do in Ulam. I shouldn't say that. I
bet you could with enough of custom
injection of code, but we're not going
to. I'm just going to do this as a raw
stand model and I'm not going to explain
every detail of it. Um, but let me, if
you'll indulge me, I've got 10 more
minutes. I want to walk through this for
you and then show you what the fit looks
like. Okay, so a stand model has blocks
and the the top block, which is
optional, is called functions where you
can write arbitrary functions that do
subcalulations for your model. And when
you model ODEs in Stan, you use the
function block to write a function that
just calculates those uses those
differential equations. We just write
them into this function. So that's what
we've got here. Um there's a there's a
header there that just passes in all the
parameters and the data. Um and then the
differential equations appear there on
the lines near the end. You can
recognize them, right? I factored out
the h and l so they look a little bit
simpler because I want to do less
multiplication. So I always factor to
the simplest form when I do math inside
the computer. Yeah. Fewer operations is
good. Yeah. Um but that's just the
differential equations.
Good. Uh and then
oh wait. Uhhuh. Yeah. I actually here we
go. So I had another animation where I
say those are the differential
equations. All right. Good. Um there's a
transform parameters block where uh
we're going to pass that function
to a specialized function inside stan
which solves the differential equation
set and this is integrate od rk45 here
uh is what it is. It's it's a way uh
it's just one particular algorithm for
doing the that integral
and you pass in there's a particular
syntax here uh which is explained in the
stand manual and you pass it all in and
it does the hard work for you sort of
magically it's nice and comforting. Um
every probabilistic programming language
has functions like this for integrating
ODEs because this is such a common thing
to do. Yeah, it's a big area of
statistical modeling to do this. Um and
that's the good news. you don't have to
invent any of it. Uh good applied
mathematicians have worked hard on those
algorithms, tested them and so on. Uh
then finally the actual model block is
almost trivial. You define the priors
and then you just um because in
transform parameters we've already got
predictions for every uh uh every set of
measurements in the whole time series
all the measurements of the pelts all
the way through. That's what the
transform parameters block did by
passing to integrate OD because it gives
us predictions for the whole time
series. And so the only thing that's
left to do in the model block is deal
with the measurement error, right? Take
the the the integration of the ODS gives
you predicted true population states.
And then we just have to translate that
to the pelts
and that's what the log normal does. And
that's it. Easy, right?
Um this generalizes to bigger systems of
ODEs. This is a huge area of modeling.
Uh there's this whole area of
statistical modeling called
pharmacocinetics
where um uh uh people study how drugs
and hormones diffuse through the body,
right? Depending upon reach target
tissues and that's a really essential
way of doing drug design and
understanding pain relief and therapies
like in chemotherapy and other things
like that. And it's it's done with ODEs.
You treat the body like a set of
compartments with tissues and there are
flow rates and that's a huge active area
of applied research. Um and lots of
people use stand to do it for these
reasons. You with me so far? Yeah. Get
the idea? Um okay. So we can do
posterior simulations. Now this is the
figure from the book. Uh it's not a
great figure and I'm going to explain
why and then I'm going to do something
better. Um each of these uh uh curves is
a sample from the posterior and we've
drawn it up. But there's a black curve
that goes with each red curve, right?
Because they're common draws. Yeah. But
you can't see which ones go with which
that's just very difficult to do. Yeah.
Uh but that's how it is. But this gives
you an idea of this. This is true
population dynamics plus measurement
error which is why there's lots of
spiking and jumping because the
measurement error here is quite
substantial the model thinks. Yeah. Um
but you get an idea how it fits and the
points are the raw data.
Um uh so I'm going to do the thing I do
always in these cases and do an
animation. Uh which also may not be
super satisfying but at least it's nice
to look at. So these are now tracking
one another. They're common draws from
the posterior. And you can see like one
goes up, the other goes up sort of thing
that you couldn't see in the other one.
Yeah.
But there's measurement error here too.
So you can get them out of sync
sometimes. Is it satisfying? Yes. You're
loving this? Yeah. Okay.
Yeah. Once I wrote the the generalized
functions to make these animations, I
kind of went silly and just started
doing it for lots of stuff because it
became easy, right? Um,
yeah, there's a bunch of undocumented
functions in the rethinking package for
making these animations now that I used
to make them. I should document them.
Okay. Um, and we can compare this to the
prior just to show you that uh the
posterior is a lot more contracted than
the prior. The the prior relationships
are much more general, many more flat
relationships in the prior, for example,
uh, and even stronger ones compared to
what we've learned from it.
Okay, I'm I'm kind of on time. That's
amazing. Okay, what do I want you to get
from this lesson? Um, well, I wanted you
to have an example of a workflow that
includes uh ordinary differential
equations as a way to model um uh time
series dynamics. Uh ODEs of course
aren't only uh constrained to time. Uh
you can have OD's in space. Yeah. So,
it's like whatever you want to do. Um
uh this is the beginning of a scaffold
up in a project like this, not the end.
Real ecologies are much more complex.
They're uh links eat other things than
hair. So there are confounds here.
Confounding has not gone away, but you
can put them into it. You can add
unmeasured populations or unmeasured
species into these things. You can have
shadow odes that are unmeasured and you
can generate the consequences of that
just like we do with other models. Yeah.
So now all of that anxiety about
unmeasured confounding is not to be
ignored now but you have a productive
scientific scaffold to build it into as
well. Um
uh this kind of stuff is still much
simpler than real ecologies but it puts
lots of great work um in applied
management. uh fisheries management for
example has uh gone on more than a
hundred years now of effective use of
modeling frameworks like this to really
manage fisheries which isn't to say that
they always do it well uh or the way
that people want it but there's lots of
great success stories in this and
fisheries are a case where you can never
see the population because they're
underwater right so you're always
dealing with massive measurement error
from landings on on boats right and
counting fish nevertheless
The fisheries people got serious about
this I said hundred years ago uh and
fisheries ecology is very mathematical
for this reason and it's a whole
professional system where every uh uh
every political entity that has a coast
has got to employ some fisheries manager
who has a strong training in this
tradition and there are whole handbooks
on how to do fisheries management and
things like that. It's an it's an
example of this framework. Um uh and it
depends critically sorry I go off on
fisheries for a bit. It depends
critically on the biology of the
species. So for example lobsters
um uh lobsters you can harvest every
adult lobster every year and not deplete
the lobster fishery. Why? Because most
of the lobster population exists as
larvae at any one single point in time.
Right? This is true for most
crustaceians. Most of the population are
larvae who have not settled out and
developed shells,
right? And so you harvest all the adults
after they after the breeding time. Uh
let them lay their eggs. Yeah. Have them
fun. Lay their eggs. Harvest them all.
Eat them. Eat them all. This happens in
Maine, right? All the lobsters are
harvested every year. Next year there
will be lobsters because most of the
population, like there's an order of
magnitude more larvae than there are
adults. And this is true of clams and
lots of other stuff in the ocean. Their
their life histories are very strange.
And they spend almost their entire lives
as larvae floating around on the
currents. Yeah. Is this news to some of
you? But I think it's a fascinating
thing about their life history. This is
not true of cod tragically.
And some of you know, the Europeans here
know the the tragic history of the North
Atlantic cod. Um they have never
recovered. Right now the North Atlantic
is just stocked full of squid,
which I'm sorry do not taste as good. I
like squid, but they're just not as good
as cod. Right? It's just not the same.
Um, but that's part of what goes on. You
need to do you need to get more biology
in here to deal with that sort of stuff.
Um, the life history stages, uh, you can
put life history stages of the fish into
these models as well, and people do that
lots and all that helps with adaptive
management of the population. Okay,
that's my sermon about how this stuff is
actually useful. Um, right. So, uh, I
wanted to give you two examples of of
putting things in the in the, uh,
non-square hole all the time. Uh, and
this is the sequel, right? I don't know
if you've seen it. Um, she's fearful
now, right? So, that there is a big
applied stats literature where people
make bespoke models, scientifically
inspired bespoke models, uh, and and fit
them to data. And there are real
dividends to doing that. It's like, oh,
it's so good, [laughter] right? And uh
uh in the book I give you two other
examples. Another OD example which is a
growth process example and um an example
where there are hidden latent states.
It's uh it's a hidden Markoff model, a
simple hidden Markoff model uh in the
chapter as well. So you take a look at
those. Um you can use those kinds of
case studies to uh scaffold up to your
problems as well. We can get the elation
here. She's going to be really happy in
a moment.
Yes. Okay. [snorts] Very good. Um,
right. I know this this material is is
difficult. It's the kind of stuff you
really need to work through the case
studies a bit and vary the assumptions
and do simulations to understand. That's
really the only way to get there. The
best I can do in these lectures is give
you a workflow to follow where I think
you can responsibly engineer what you're
doing and try to inspire you that there
are real uh gains that come from uh
departing from the generalized linear
modeling framework. Uh so thanks for
your intention and I wish you well in
trying to adapt these tools to to your
work.